# Functions

This section discusses functions, another fundamental building block of almost
all programming languages.  Functions allow us to use the same code more than
once without copy pasting it.  They are similar to mathematical functions in
that they take an input, and provide and output.

## Basic Anatomy

Below is a general outline of a function definition.

```
RETURN_TYPE FUNCTION_NAME(TYPE_1 PARAM_1, TYPE_2 PARAM_2... TYPE_N PARAM_N) {
    STATEMENTS;
    return RETVAL;
}
```

Here is what each of these means:

* Return Type: The type of the output variable
* Function Name: What the function is called
* Param 1...N: The parameters (inputs) to be passed in
* Type 1...N: The types expected of each parameter (input)
* Statements: The code of the function
* return: The value is computed and returned to the caller

The first line in the outline is known as the **function signature**,
which defines the input and outputs types.

Now we will go through many examples of different functions, increasing in
complexity.

## No Input, No Output

The simplest possible function has no inputs and no outputs.  This can be
*defined* and *called* as follows.

```c
void myFunction() {

}

int main() {
    myFunction();
}
```


To say that a function returns nothing, one can set the return type to `void`.

Void functions are particularly useful when the function's main purpose is to
produce some side effect.  An example you are already familiar with is
`printf`.  Below is an example of a `void` function that actually does
something.

Note that because there are no inputs to the function,
we call it simply by writing the function name followed
by empty parentheses: `()`.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

void sayHi() {
    printf("Hi\n");
}

int main() {
    sayHi();
}
```
```
Hi
```

## One Input, No Output

The code below is an example of a function which takes
only one input, an integer to print, and outputs nothing.

Note that in the function signature, we added `int num`
to specify that the function takes one integer as its
input.  We also called the function with `(42)` instead
of empty parentheses to feed the value 42.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

void printInt(int num) {
    printf("%d\n", num);
}

int main() {
    printInt(42);
}
```
```
42
```

## One Input, One Output

This code is an example of a function which takes one
input, does something with it, and returns a value.  We
picked the particularly simple example of adding two to
the input.

Note that we changed the return type of the function
in the signature from `void` to `int`.  Then, when
calling the function we **assigned** the output
to the variable `three`.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int addTwo(int num) {
    return num + 2;
}

int main() {
    int three = addTwo(1);
    printf("three = %d\n", three);
}
```
```
three = 3
```

## Multiple Inputs, One Output

The code below demonstrates the definition of a function
with two inputs and one output.  The function simply
takes two integers and adds them.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int add(int a, int b) {
    return a + b;
}

int main() {
    int five = add(2, 3);
    printf("five = %d\n", five);
}
```
```
five = 5
```

Note that we added one more parameter in the signature.

## Multiple Inputs, Multiple Outputs

Unfortunately, it is not really possible to return
multiple values in C.  In future sections we will see
how we can simulate returning multiple values.
