# Control Flow

This section discusses control flow, meaning how to control the order in which
steps in your program are run.

## Conditional Statements (If-Else)

The `if` statement is fundamental to control flow, and is at the core of most
constructs we will talk about.  Consider for example, getting the maximum of
two numbers, a previous assignment.  True, you can accomplish this through the
ternary operator, but the `if` statement allow for far more complex cases.
Below is an example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ifsimple.c"}
```

Formally, if the condition (in the parentheses) is true (nonzero) then the
statement is executed.  Often we also want to do something in the case that the
condition is false, and this is where `else` comes in.  Simply slap an `else`
on the line after the statement like so:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ifelsesimple.c"}
```

Now, suppose you wanted to keep track of say, if `y` was greater than `x`.  One
way to do this is to create a variable for it and set it as demonstrated below.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ifelsetrap.c"}
```

Huh that's weird...  `y` is `5` and `x` is `10` so why did `y_was_greater` get
set to `1`?  Well, our spacing is misleading.  Even though we indented
`y_was_greater=1`, it is actually not "inside" the `else`.  When we use
`if/else` in this fashion, only one statement is covered.

## Code Blocks

The way to avoid the previous confusion is to use a *block *.  A block is code
within braces: `{}`.  Any code within braces is equivalent to a single
statement, so we can load as much as we want into them.  For example, the
correct way to achieve what we want is this:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ifelseblock.c"}
```

More complexity is introduced with nested if statements.  Consider the case of
modeling a stduent's reaction to a grade illustrated below.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ifcomplex.c"}
```

Note that the logic of this example, while not very easy to follow, is aided by
judicious use of "whitespace".  After every `if` or `else` is a new line and an
additional 4 spaces to show the statement is *nested* one level deeper.  These
newlines and spaces are technically not needed to get the same result, as shown
in the following equivalent example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ifnospace.c"}
```

Just because you can, does not mean you should however.  The above is very poor
style and it is impossible to read.  Never do it!  Always align your `else` and
`if` statements at the same level.

## Switch

A `switch` statement can be used if you have many possible constant values you
want to check against.  It is more or less equivalent to a long chain of
`if-else` statements, though slightly easier to write out.  The example program
below uses switch statements to selec a dwarf to quote from Snow White

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/switchwrong.c"}
```

Hmm, something seems not quite right.  We selected 3 and got the quote for 3,
but then we also got all the following quotes.  The reason this happened is
because the switch essentially just says to go to whatever case and then
continue running the code from there.  The cases do not strictly seperate code,
they only act as labels for where to go.  If we want to execute only the code
inside that case, we must `break` out of the `switch` as follows

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/switchright.c"}
```

Not including the `break` can be helpful if we want to combine cases, and this
is one of the advantages of the `switch` case over `if-else`.  For example
check out the following code which counts down from a chosen number:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/switchnobreak.c"}
```

Note that this code also makes use of the `default` keyword.  In switch
statements, `default` just means go here if none of the other cases worked.
For example, if had entered `int countDownFrom = 100`, the output would have
been only `Lift off!`.

This code has an obvious weakness however.  What if want to count down from a
number higher than 5?  We would have to add more and more code.  If we wanted
to count down from 100 our code would be gigantic.  Luckily as we will see,
loops provide a better way!

## While Loop

A `while` loop is our way of telling our machine: "While this condition is
true, do X."  This can be used for example, to create a countdown from some
arbitrary integer as in the following example:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/countdown.c"}
```

As you can see, we can use a `while` loop to repeat lines of code multiple
times.  This means we can fit a potentially infinite number of actions into a
small number of lines of code, and that is very powerful.

What follows is a much more complex example of using a `while` loop to
approximate the square root of 2.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/bisect.c"}
```

This is an algorithm called the bisection method.  It works taking a lower
bound for the answer and an upper bound for the answer and shifting them toward
each other until they are nearly the same.  We can do this reliably in this
case because the function we are guessing and checking on is monotonically
increasing in a known range (the square function).

Essentially, guess a number, if the square is too high go down.  If the square
is too low, go higher.  That is the essence of the alorithm.  The `while` loop
allows us to keep going until our guess is within some distance of the real
answer.

*Question: Can you write code to use the same algorithm to find cube roots?*


## For Loop

As we saw with the last example, `while` loops are quite useful, especially in
cases where you don't know how many steps some computation will take.  Some
commonalities in the loops we have seen are:

* Initialize a value Check a condition Do something at the end

A `for` loop can make these steps more clear in simple cases.  For example
consider again the case of counting down from some number:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/countdownfor.c"}
```

The `for` loop is typically preferable when you have some simple
initialization, condition, and increment/decrement.  Note that this `for` loop
is a little more readable than the `while` loop we had before. However, you
should note that you can always get away with using one or the other and its
fine to stick with the one you are most comfortable with.

Here is a slightly more complex example including a *nested* loop (meaning a
loop within a loop) to produce a times table.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/nested.c"}
```

## Do-While Loop

The `do-while` loop is a slight modification to the `while` loop.  The only
difference is that the `do-while` loop guarantees that the body is executed
at least once.  Is is structured like this:

```
do
    statement
while (expression);
```

This essentially says "do (whatever) while (the expression) is true"

An example of using a `do-while` to generate a random number between 0 and 100
is shown below:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/dowhile.c"}
```

Note that there are better methods for generating random numbers in a certain
range, this is shown only as a simple example.  You should also note that
any `do-while` can loop can be replaced by a `while` loop, and they are not
ever strictly necessary.  For example, the program below performs the same
computation.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/whilerand.c"}
```

You can see we translated the `do-while` into a `while` loop by adding the body
right before the loop.  You can imagine this might be excessive if you have a
lot in the body, so we will now discuss some other helpful constructs that
will make this more elegant.

## Break and Continue

The `break` and `continue` statements allow us to have more control over our
loops.  `break` breaks us out of the loop and sends us to the end while
`continue` places us back at the start of the loop.

Below is an example that uses `break` that is used to generate a random number
is a similar fashion as the previous two examples.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/breakrand.c"}
```

The `while 1` means loop forever (since 1 is always true) which may not be
a good idea in many cases.  However, because of the `break` statement, we
are still able to exit the loop once we have generated a number less than
or equal to 100.

The `continue` statement is good for avoiding nesting `if` statements very
deeply inside your loop.  A typical case would be where you are performing
a sequence of steps, and after each step you check if you are able to skip
the rest.

The following is a contrived example of such a form of processing.  For every
number 0 through 49, we print it if:

* It is divisible by 3
* Its square is less than 500
* Its cube is not divisible by 5

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/continue.c"}
```

Here, we could have computed the square and cube at the start and then put
all of the conditions in one big statement.  However, that method would
potentially waste time on later computations which could have been skipped.
To avoid the wasted time, we could instead nest the `if` statements though
most would consider that harder to read.

On a practical note, you should generally try to avoid using `continue` and
`break` especially far from the start of the loop, or the code may become
confusing to read.  The reader will have to jump all over the place to
understand the flow of the program.  That brings us to our next point, you
should almost never use...

## Goto and Labels

With all of this jumping around inside loops.  You may ask whether it is
possible to simply jump anywhere in the program, and the answer is yes!  Using
`goto` you can jump basically andwhere you desire.  The following example
uses `goto` to find one Pythagorean triple.  As soon as it finds it, it
immediately jumps all the way out of the deeply nested loop, rather than
spending any extra time inside.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/goto.c"}
```

This is indeed very useful.  But you should still try to avoid it, and note
that you never **need** a `goto`.  The following is similar code that uses
the `break` statement instead.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/breaktriple.c"}
```

It does seem a lot harder to read, and the `if` statement does take some time
to perform, but it is usually a cost worth paying.  It is hard to see the
benefit because the code presented is very compact to start with, but `goto`
makes things much harder in large code projects.  We will see a better way to
write this when we learn functions in an upcoming section.  For more reading,
see [XKCD 292](https://xkcd.com/292/) or 
[Go To Statement Considered Harmful](http://www.u.arizona.edu/~rubinson/copyright_violations/Go_To_Considered_Harmful.html).

Now that I've given you all the warnings, there are some cases where `goto` is
really the right thing to do.  One common case is error handling.  If your
program reaches some unexpected state and you want one place to go in the case
of an error, it is acceptable to use `goto` in C.  Other programming languages
have much better support for error handling and so they have actually removed
`goto` all together.

# Conclusion

You now have all the tools you need to fully control your program's flow.
From here on out, we will discuss tools to make that flow easier to build
and read.
