# Functions

This section discusses functions, another fundamental building block of almost
all programming languages.  Functions allow us to use the same code more than
once without copy pasting it.  They are similar to mathematical functions in
that they take an input, and provide and output.

## Basic Anatomy

Below is a general outline of a function definition.

```
RETURN_TYPE FUNCTION_NAME(TYPE_1 PARAM_1, TYPE_2 PARAM_2... TYPE_N PARAM_N) {
    STATEMENTS;
    return RETVAL;
}
```

Here is what each of these means:

* Return Type: The type of the output variable
* Function Name: What the function is called
* Param 1...N: The parameters (inputs) to be passed in
* Type 1...N: The types expected of each parameter (input)
* Statements: The code of the function
* return: The value is computed and returned to the caller

The first line in the outline is known as the **function signature**,
which defines the input and outputs types.

Now we will go through many examples of different functions, increasing in
complexity.

## No Input, No Output

The simplest possible function has no inputs and no outputs.  This can be
*defined* and *called* as follows.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/func.c"}
```

To say that a function returns nothing, one can set the return type to `void`.

Void functions are particularly useful when the function's main purpose is to
produce some side effect.  An example you are already familiar with is
`printf`.  Below is an example of a `void` function that actually does
something.

Note that because there are no inputs to the function, we call it simply by
writing the function name followed by empty parentheses: `()`.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/void.c"}
```

## One Input, No Output

The code below is an example of a function which takes only one input, an
integer to print, and outputs nothing.

Note that in the function signature, we added `int num` to specify that the
function takes one integer as its input.  We also called the function with
`(42)` instead of empty parentheses to feed the value 42.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/param.c"}
```

## One Input, One Output

This code is an example of a function which takes one input, does something
with it, and returns a value.  We picked the particularly simple example of
adding two to the input.

Note that we changed the return type of the function in the signature from
`void` to `int`.  Then, when calling the function we **assigned** the output to
the variable `three`.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/output.c"}
```

## Multiple Inputs, One Output

The code below demonstrates the definition of a function with two inputs and
one output.  The function simply takes two integers and adds them.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/multi.c"}
```

Note that we added one more parameter in the signature.

## Multiple Inputs, Multiple Outputs

Unfortunately, it is not really possible to return multiple values in C.  In
future sections we will see how we can simulate returning multiple values.

## Function Prototypes

In some cases, it is convenient to place function
definitions separate from their implementation.  A
definition without an implementation is called a
`prototype`.

In the below example we define the `add` function first with no body, and then
later we define it again with a body.  The definition can be used to check that
the function call in `main` is valid.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/prototype.c"}
```

If you do not place the prototype before calling the function, you may get
strange results as shown in the following example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/noprototype.c"}
```

## Function Composition

You can use functions as many times as you want, and feed their outputs as
inputs to other functions.  The code below demonstrates a simple example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/composition.c"}
```

*Question: what is the value of the sum variable above?*

## Returning Early

Functions may return a value early, before all code has been executed.  In this
example we see how this can be useful for breaking out of multiple loops.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/functriple.c"}
```

This function is not quite so useful, as it only says whether a triple exists
rather than what the triple is.  We will have to wait to see how we can return
all three numbers.

## Recursion

Functions may call themselves, as demonstrated by the following code which
calculates Fibonacci numbers.  The Nth fibonacci number is defined the be the
sum of the (N-1)th fibonacci number and the (N-2)th fibonacci number.  The 0th
and 1st fibonacci numbers are defined to be 1.  These are the "base case" for
the `fib` function meaning they are not in terms of other values, and all other
values can be computed from these.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/fibonacci.c"}
```

## Interactive Example

Let's write a function that raises one number to the power of another.

## Scope Rules

The following is an excerpt from *The C Programming Language* on scope:

> The scope of a name is the part of the program within which the name can be
> used. For an automatic variable declared at the beginning of a function, the
> scope is the function in which the name is declared. Local variables of the
> same name in different functions are unrelated. The same is true of the
> parameters of the function, which are in effect local variables.

For example, note in the following example that there are two scopes for
`func` and `main`.  Even though they use the same variables name, `myVar`,
it has two distinct values in each scope.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/scopebasic.c"}
```

## Global Variables

Functions can of course read and write variables that are defined interally but
they can also read and write *global* varialbes which are defined externally
These variables are also sometimes called *external* variables.  The rule
for external variable scope is given by *The C Programming Language* here:

> The scope of an external variable or a function lasts from the point at which
> it is declared to the end of the file being compiled.

The following examples demonstrates how this can be useful for keeping some
*state* in between calls.  The `countCalls` function returns the number of
times it has been called.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/countcalls.c"}
```

Another possible, though not necessarily recommended
use of global variables is as a way of returning 
multiple values from a computation.  For example,
consider the function for finding Pythagorean triples
demonstrated below.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/returnextern.c"}
```

External variables can also be useful for sharing
information between function without explicitly
passing it back and forth.  Consider this program
which implements functions to simulate the (X, Y)
position of something:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/share.c"}
```

*Note on Style* Global variables are generally quite frowned upon for the cases
above because it makes the flow of larger programs much harder to follow.
However, it is generally okay to use global variables that are *read only*
meaning that you do not modify them.  For this purpose you should use the
`const` keyword as demonstrated below:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/constglobal.c"}
```

Note also that in all of these cases, the names of the global variables are
all capital.  This makes it easy to distinguish them from regular variables,
and you always follow this style.

## Static Variables

Static variables allow us to replicate some of the behavior of global variables
without the messiness of sharing involved.  Static variables let us store
information in a function permanently, rather than destroying it when the
function is over.  This example demonstrates how to use a static variable
to keep track of the number of times a function has been called wihtout using
a global variables:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/countcallsstatic.c"}
```

You might think that assigning the value `0` to `counter` at the beginning of
the `countCalls` function would mean the value returned is always `1` and you
would be right if the variable wasn't declared as `static`.  However because
we used the `static` keyword, the value is stored forever and can be modified
and read later.
