# Multiple File Programs

Now, while the examples we have looked at so far are small, programs in
the real world consist of thousands upon thousands of lines.  Not only
do individual programs consists of thousands of lines, but they may depend
upon other programs which have aleady been compiled.  This section will
show you how to deal with such cases in C.

## Including Other Files

It is quite simple to include other files in your C program.  Check out this
simple example:

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/multifile1.c -o multifile.out"],
"show": ["snippets/multifile2.c", "snippets/multifile1.c"],
"run": ["./multifile.out"],
"clean": ["rm multifile.out"]
}
```

Yes it turns out we have been doing it this whole time with `#include`!  You
will notice one difference between the `#include` we have been using and the
one we used to include our own file: angle brackets `<>` vs quotes `""`.  Using
quotes simply says to check our current directory for the file, and if nothing
is found, search same way `<>` would search (which is implementation defined).
So what does `#include` actually do?  It's actually extremely simple, it just
takes the contents of the file it finds, and puts it in place of the statement
just before compliation.  So if you are ever trying to figure out the effect of
a `#incldue` statement, just imagine copy pasting the file there instead.


## Including Already Compiled Files

Now, there are cases in which you want to use code but
not compile from the source directly

1. You do not want to spend time re-compiling old code
2. You do not have access to the source code

In either of these cases you will be using *object code* which is essentially
just code that has already been compiled.  To compile object code of a C
program, you can run `gcc filename.c -c` which by default produces a file with
name `filename.o` (`o` for object).  For example, you can run `gcc
snippets/multifile2.c -c` and you should see `multifile2.o` appear.

Now, how do we include this with our compilation of `snippets/multifile1.c`?
Lets try running: `gcc snippets/multfile3.c multifile2.c`

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/multifile2.c -c",
          "gcc snippets/multifile3.c multifile2.o -o multifile.out"],
"show": ["snippets/multifile2.c", "snippets/multifile3.c"],
"run": ["./multifile.out"],
"clean": ["rm multifile.out"]
}
```

Note that the only modification we made to the file was excluding the
`#include` since we are simulating a case in which we do not use the original
source code.  However now we get a nice big warning saying that `add` has not
been defined.  This is because the definition is not present anywhere in the
source code we have.  Now you might go ahead and ingore the warning, and if you
run the resulting file, you may even get the right result!

However, warnings are there for a reason, and you should almost never ignore
them.  Check the *Function Prototypes* section of the last session to
understand this particular warning's danger.

Now, you first gut reaction to this warning may be to put the prototype in
the file we are compiling like so:

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/multifile4.c -o multifile.out"],
"show": ["snippets/multifile2.c", "snippets/multifile4.c"],
"run": ["./multifile.out"],
"clean": ["rm multifile.out"]
}
```

And this will work!  However you should consider ahead of time that this
will become tedious especially if there are multiple files that depend on
this object code, or if you are giving object code to someone, they probably
don't want to copy paste your prototypes everywhere they use your code.  This
is where *header files* come in.

A header file isn't a special file format, it is regular C code.  However, it
is an agreed upon good practice.  A header should generally only include
function definitions, as in the next iteration of our example shows below:

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/addition.c -c",
          "gcc snippets/properheader.c addition.h -o properheader.out"],
"show": ["snippets/addition.h", "snippets/addition.c",  "snippets/properheader.c"],
"run": ["./properheader.out"],
"clean": ["rm properheader.out"]
}
```

## Scope Rules in Multiple Files

Now let's think about what happens to our old global variables in this new
system of multiple files.  We said earlier that you can think of the `#include`
statement as simply copy pasting the file, so a global variable in the first
file will become a global variable in the result.  But what happens when we
first compile an external file and then use the global?  Let's consider two
cases:

1. We *declare* the variable but do not *initialize* it.  You can think of this
as declaring a function but not defining it (a function prototype)

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/sine.c -c",
          "gcc snippets/globalmulti.c sine.o -o globalmulti.out"],
"show": ["snippets/sine.c", "snippets/globalmulti.c"],
"run": ["./globalmulti.out"],
"clean": ["rm globalmulti.out"]
}
```

In this case, the value is pulled from the compiled code just fine.

2. We *declare* the variable **and** *initialize* it.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/sine.c -c",
          "gcc snippets/globalmultiinit.c sine.o -o globalmultiinit.out"],
"show": ["snippets/sine.c", "snippets/globalmultiinit.c"],
"run": ["./globalmultiinit.out"],
"clean": ["rm globalmultiinit.out"]
}
```

In this case, it is as if we have declared the variable twice which is not
allowed!  This can grow troublesome if we are using a lot of external code
and we accidentally use their global variables.  A way of protecting against
this is using the *static* keyword in the original code, which hides the
variable from future users.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/sinestatic.c -c",
          "gcc snippets/globalmultiinit.c sinestatic.o -o globalmultiinit.out"],
"show": ["snippets/sinestatic.c", "snippets/globalmultiinit.c"],
"run": ["./globalmultiinit.out"],
"clean": ["rm globalmultiinit.out"]
}
```

Now, since the original `PI` is hidden and unusable, we can declare a new one
and use it as we please.


## Block Structure

In general, code inside curly braces `{}` may initialize new variables, even if
they have the same name as variables outside of the braces.  Consider this
example which only uses one variable name `i` but assigns it many different
values.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/block.c"],
"show": ["snippets/block.c"],
"run": ["./block.out"],
"clean": ["rm block.out"]
}
```

Note that if you try to defined a variable with the same name as one in the
outer scope after using it in the block, you will get a compiler error as
demonstrated here.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/badblock.c"],
"show": ["snippets/badblock.c"],
"run": ["./badblock.out"],
"clean": ["rm badblock.out"]
}
```

*Note on design* While you can use the same name as variables in the outer
scope, it is generally unwise and likely to cause confusion.

## Macro Substitution

Macro substitution allows you to define a piece of replacement text for text in
your code.  You can do this with the `#define` statement.  This statement is
similar to `#include` in that it essentially copy-pastes code but it does have
a few caveats that make it dangerous.

For example, the macro demonstrated below lets you write `forever` instead of
`while (1)` to create an infinite loop.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/forevermacro.c"],
"show": ["snippets/forevermacro.c"],
"run": ["./forevermacro.out"],
"clean": ["rm forevermacro.out"]
}
```

You can also define macros similar to functions which take multiple values:

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/multimacro.c"],
"show": ["snippets/multimacro.c"],
"run": ["./multimacro.out"],
"clean": ["rm multimacro.out"]
}
```

Hmm, that's strange...

Because the macro is a simple copy paste, the line `int m = max(++i, ++j)`
is equivalent to `int m = (++i) > (++j) ? (++i) : (++j))` and the increment
is applied once before `?` and once after, resulting in a value of `2`.

The copy-paste nature of `#define` can also lead to unexpected results when
taking into account precedence:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/precedencemacro.c"}
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/precedencemacro.c"],
"show": ["snippets/precedencemacro.c"],
"run": ["./precedencemacro.out"],
"clean": ["rm precedencemacro.out"]
}
```
